README.md, before:

# fautodiff
Autodiff code generator for Fortran

This is a source-to-source conversion tool that generates automatic differentiation code from Fortran programs.
Documentation of the supported Fortran constructs can be found under
``doc/fortran_support.md``.

## Installation

The parser relies on the `fparser` package (version **0.2.0 or later**) which can be installed via pip:

```bash
pip install "fparser>=0.2.0"
```

## Generating AD code

For simple examples the ``fautodiff.generator`` module can create a forward or reverse mode automatic differentiation version of a Fortran source file.
The generator parses the input via :mod:`fautodiff.parser` (which internally relies on ``fparser2``) and retains the original structure with ``_ad`` appended to
routine names.
Integer variables are treated as constants, so no ``_ad`` variables are generated for them.
The generated module is named ``<module>_ad`` and provides both a forward (``<name>_fwd_ad``) and a reverse (``<name>_rev_ad``) version of each original routine.

Generate the AD code for an example file ``examples/simple_math.f90``:
```bash
# print to standard output
bin/fautodiff examples/simple_math.f90

# or write to a file
bin/fautodiff examples/simple_math.f90 -o examples/simple_math_ad.f90
```

Example of the original code in ``examples/simple_math.f90``:
```fortran
  work = a + b
  c = a + 1.0
  c = c + 2.0 + work
```

Generated forward mode AD code in ``examples/simple_math_ad.f90``:
```fortran
  work_ad = a_ad + b_ad ! work = a + b
  work = a + b
  c_ad = a_ad ! c = a + 1.0
  c = a + 1.0
  c_ad = c_ad + work_ad ! c = c + 2.0 + work
  c = c + 2.0 + work
```

Generated reverse mode AD code in ``examples/simple_math_ad.f90``:
```fortran
  work_ad = c_ad ! c = c + 2.0 + work
  a_ad = c_ad ! c = a + 1.0
  c_ad = 0.0 ! c = a + 1.0
  a_ad = work_ad + a_ad ! work = a + b
  b_ad = work_ad ! work = a + b
```

Additional examples are available under the directory ``examples``.

You can select the differentiation mode with ``--mode``.
Pass ``forward`` for forward mode only or ``reverse`` for reverse mode only.
The default ``both`` generates both sets of routines.

Generate forward mode only:
```bash
bin/fautodiff --mode forward examples/simple_math.f90
```

Generate reverse mode only:
```bash
bin/fautodiff --mode reverse examples/simple_math.f90
```

Each module's routine signatures are also written to a `<module>.fadmod` file when AD code is generated.
These JSON files can be loaded when differentiating another file that uses the module.
Add search directories with ``-I`` (repeat as needed), choose the output directory with ``-M DIR`` (defaults to the current directory), and disable writing with ``--no-fadmod``:
```bash
# write ``cross_mod_a.fadmod`` under ``examples``
bin/fautodiff -M examples examples/cross_mod_a.f90

# load that file when differentiating another module
bin/fautodiff -I examples examples/cross_mod_b.f90
```

Generate code programmatically from Python:
```python
from fautodiff.generator import generate_ad

ad_code = generate_ad("examples/simple_math.f90")
print(ad_code)
```

### Calling forward-mode routines

Forward-mode subroutines execute the original computations and return each ``intent(out)`` variable along with its derivative.
Arguments consist of the original inputs followed by their derivative counterparts:
```fortran
interface
  subroutine foo(x, y)
    real, intent(in) :: x
    real, intent(out) :: y
  end subroutine foo
end interface

real :: x, x_ad, y, y_ad
x = 2.0
x_ad = 1.0
call foo_fwd_ad(x, x_ad, y, y_ad) ! x: in, x_ad: in, y: out, y_ad: out
```

### Calling reverse-mode routines

Reverse-mode subroutines return each ``intent(in)`` or ``intent(inout)`` variable along with its derivative.
Arguments consist of the original inputs followed by their derivative counterparts:
```fortran
real :: x, x_ad, y, y_ad
x = 2.0
y_ad = 1.0
call foo_rev_ad(x, x_ad, y_ad) ! x: in, x_ad: out, y_ad: inout
```

## Directives

See ``doc/directives.md`` for a description of optional directives that can control how AD code is generated.
Details on how module variable assignments are handled in reverse mode are in the [Module variables in reverse mode](doc/fortran_support.md#module-variables-in-reverse-mode) section.

## Supported Fortran syntax and features

See ``doc/fortran_support.md`` for a description of supported Fortran constructs.

## Runtime stack module

The helper module `fautodiff_stack` stores data that must persist between the forward and reverse sweeps.
It defines stack types for real, double precision, logical and integer values and pointers.
Four default stacks (`fautodiff_stack_r4`, `fautodiff_stack_r8`, `fautodiff_stack_l`, `fautodiff_stack_i`, and `fautodiff_stack_p) are provided for convenience.
Each stack allocates memory in pages and the size of a page can be changed by modifying the `page_size` component before the first push.

# Tests

Run the included tests with:

```bash
python tests/test_generator.py
python tests/test_fortran_runtime.py
python tests/test_fortran_adcode.py
```

## Code tree structure

Automatic differentiation output is built from a tree of nodes defined in ``fautodiff.code_tree``.
Each node represents a Fortran construct such as a ``Block``, ``Assignment`` or ``IfBlock`` and provides a ``render`` method that returns formatted source lines.
The generator populates this tree while walking the parsed input and then renders it to produce the final AD code.

Contributors adding new features should rely on these new node classes instead of creating raw strings so that the tree remains consistent.

Commit message:

docs: correct reverse-mode derivative intent

README.md, after:

# fautodiff
Autodiff code generator for Fortran

This source-to-source tool parses existing Fortran programs and emits new modules
with ``_ad`` suffixes, preserving the original structure while providing forward
and reverse mode derivatives. Documentation of the supported Fortran constructs
can be found in ``doc/fortran_support.md``.

## Installation

The parser relies on the `fparser` package (version **0.2.0 or later**) which can be installed via pip:

```bash
pip install "fparser>=0.2.0"
```

## Generating AD code

For simple examples the ``fautodiff.generator`` module can create a forward or reverse mode automatic differentiation version of a Fortran source file.
The generator parses the input via :mod:`fautodiff.parser` (which internally relies on ``fparser2``) and retains the original structure with ``_ad`` appended to
routine names.
Integer variables are treated as constants, so no ``_ad`` variables are generated for them.
The generated module is named ``<module>_ad`` and provides both a forward (``<name>_fwd_ad``) and a reverse (``<name>_rev_ad``) version of each original routine.

Generate the AD code for an example file ``examples/simple_math.f90``:
```bash
# print to standard output
bin/fautodiff examples/simple_math.f90

# or write to a file
bin/fautodiff examples/simple_math.f90 -o examples/simple_math_ad.f90
```

Example of the original code in ``examples/simple_math.f90``:
```fortran
  work = a + b
  c = a + 1.0
  c = c + 2.0 + work
```

Generated forward mode AD code in ``examples/simple_math_ad.f90``:
```fortran
  work_ad = a_ad + b_ad ! work = a + b
  work = a + b
  c_ad = a_ad ! c = a + 1.0
  c = a + 1.0
  c_ad = c_ad + work_ad ! c = c + 2.0 + work
  c = c + 2.0 + work
```

Generated reverse mode AD code in ``examples/simple_math_ad.f90``:
```fortran
  work_ad = c_ad ! c = c + 2.0 + work
  a_ad = c_ad ! c = a + 1.0
  c_ad = 0.0 ! c = a + 1.0
  a_ad = work_ad + a_ad ! work = a + b
  b_ad = work_ad ! work = a + b
```

Additional examples are available under the directory ``examples``.

You can select the differentiation mode with ``--mode``.
Pass ``forward`` for forward mode only or ``reverse`` for reverse mode only.
The default ``both`` generates both sets of routines.

Generate forward mode only:
```bash
bin/fautodiff --mode forward examples/simple_math.f90
```

Generate reverse mode only:
```bash
bin/fautodiff --mode reverse examples/simple_math.f90
```

Suppress warnings about unsupported derivatives with ``--no-warn``:
```bash
bin/fautodiff --no-warn examples/simple_math.f90
```

Each module's routine signatures are also written to a `<module>.fadmod` file when AD code is generated.
These JSON files can be loaded when differentiating another file that uses the module.
Add search directories with ``-I`` (repeat as needed), choose the output directory with ``-M DIR`` (defaults to the current directory), and disable writing with ``--no-fadmod``:
```bash
# write ``cross_mod_a.fadmod`` under ``examples``
bin/fautodiff -M examples examples/cross_mod_a.f90

# load that file when differentiating another module
bin/fautodiff -I examples examples/cross_mod_b.f90
```

Generate code programmatically from Python:
```python
from fautodiff.generator import generate_ad

ad_code = generate_ad("examples/simple_math.f90")
print(ad_code)
```

### Calling forward-mode routines

Forward-mode subroutines execute the original computations and return each ``intent(out)`` variable along with its derivative.
Arguments consist of the original inputs followed by their derivative counterparts:
```fortran
interface
  subroutine foo(x, y)
    real, intent(in) :: x
    real, intent(out) :: y
  end subroutine foo
end interface

real :: x, x_ad, y, y_ad
x = 2.0
x_ad = 1.0
call foo_fwd_ad(x, x_ad, y, y_ad) ! x: in, x_ad: in, y: out, y_ad: out
```

### Calling reverse-mode routines

Reverse-mode subroutines accept the original inputs and the derivatives of any
``intent(out)`` results. They return derivatives for ``intent(in)`` arguments and
update the derivatives of ``intent(inout)`` and ``intent(out)`` variables in
place:
```fortran
real :: x, x_ad, y_ad
x = 2.0
y_ad = 1.0
call foo_rev_ad(x, x_ad, y_ad) ! x: in, x_ad: out, y_ad: inout
```

## Directives

See ``doc/directives.md`` for a description of optional directives that can control how AD code is generated.
Details on how module variable assignments are handled in reverse mode are in the [Module variables in reverse mode](doc/fortran_support.md#module-variables-in-reverse-mode) section.

## Supported Fortran syntax and features

See ``doc/fortran_support.md`` for a description of supported Fortran constructs.

## Runtime stack module

The helper module `fautodiff_stack` stores data that must persist between the forward and reverse sweeps.
It defines stack types for real, double precision, logical and integer values and pointers.
Four default stacks (`fautodiff_stack_r4`, `fautodiff_stack_r8`, `fautodiff_stack_l`, `fautodiff_stack_i`, and `fautodiff_stack_p) are provided for convenience.
Each stack allocates memory in pages and the size of a page can be changed by modifying the `page_size` component before the first push.

# Tests

Run the included tests with:

```bash
python tests/test_generator.py
python tests/test_fortran_runtime.py
python tests/test_fortran_adcode.py
```

## Code tree structure

Automatic differentiation output is built from a tree of nodes defined in ``fautodiff.code_tree``.
Each node represents a Fortran construct such as a ``Block``, ``Assignment`` or ``IfBlock`` and provides a ``render`` method that returns formatted source lines.
The generator populates this tree while walking the parsed input and then renders it to produce the final AD code.

Contributors adding new features should rely on these new node classes instead of creating raw strings so that the tree remains consistent.
